This folder holds the implementation of a simple I/O driver. Access is
provided to the LEDs and buttons on the evaluation board. The purpose of
the implementation is to demonstrate how a system call API can be built up
in a kernelBuilder project environment.

If kernelBuilder is used to implement a task scheduler and if at least one
task is intended to run in user mode then the APIs of the I/O drivers
available to that task need to be implemented as system calls: A typical
I/O driver can't be implemented without supervisor mode instructions and
the use of these in a user mode task leads to an exception.

kernelBuilder provides all the assembler code, which is needed for a
system call. The remaining difficulty is the organization of the software
in a (larger) project in order to safely use the offered code
infrastructure. Any reasonable implementation of system calls requires a
centralized table of pointers to all the supported system calls. For
efficiency reasons, kernelBuilder took the design decision to make the
table constant. Consequently, all table entries and their indexes in the
table need to be defined and known at compile time.

It would be straight forward to have one centralized module, which
implements all of this. However, this would intermingle the implementation
of all I/O drivers throughout the entire project. The files in this folder
demonstrate a modified concept.

An I/O driver exports the list of provided system calls and the related
list of the implementing functions. It has no knowledge of the central
table and where its system calls will be placed inside that table. The
export of the lists is done by preprocessor macros, which expand to a
fragment of

* an enumeration of system call indexes
* the initializer expression for the centralized table

These macros are published in a dedicated header file. The central module
`sc_systemCalls`, which defines the one and only global table of system
calls, includes this header from all I/O drivers and puts the macros in
its (published) enumeration definition and into the initializer expression
of the table of system call implementing functions.

The I/O driver doesn't know, which actual indexes its system calls will
get (it doesn't know the contributions of other drivers and where it'll be
placed in the table). However, it has exported all its indexes as symbols
-- the enumeration values -- and can use its indexes as symbol.

To enable the compiler resolving these symbols at compile time the I/O
driver has to include the central file `sc_systemCalls.h`, where the
enumeration is compiled from all the I/O drivers contributions.
